As 2025 came to a close, Deepseek not
only started the year with Deepseek R1,
a legendary paper that defined the
testime compute paradigm, but also
actually ended it with yet another
banger. This new research had the
audacity to challenge a fundamental
decade long status quo that has
persisted across multiple model
architectures and that we had come to
assume was practically perfect. Yet,
they shattered that assumption as a new
year gift to us. And you know what's
even more absurd? They basically put
parameters where there were none. And
that alone was capable of getting
consistent performance gains across the
board. But as simple as that sound, this
paper's name is the complete opposite of
that with it being called MHC, which is
short for manifold constraint
hyperconnections. This name can probably
get away with describing a sci-fi
technology in Star Wars, but thinking it
would be describing this pretty
straightforward mechanism that Deep Seek
might have just revolutionalized for LLM
is definitely not fitting in the same
picture. But before we dive into it, if
you ever tried to build anything that
depends on live search data, like news
tracking, price monitoring, trend
dashboards, or even training data sets
for AI, you already know the painful
part isn't the idea. It's the scraping.
Everchanging captures, rotating proxies,
layer changes that would break your
parser every other week. And this is
where today's sponsor, SER API, comes
in. It provides you clean and structured
search result data from Google, YouTube,
and other search engines in a
straightforward JSON format. I have
personally done my fair share of
scraping from my projects before. And
let me tell you, having someone handle
the scraping aspect is actually so much
nicer than doing it yourself because all
the scraping headaches in the background
are completely gone. So, we can focus on
building the actual apps. This is also
amazing if you're doing ML or AI work,
too. You can build data sets using
things like image titles, thumbnails,
URLs, or even research metadata through
their Google Scholar API. I wish I had
this when I was building my top most
cited research paper list last year, and
it would have saved me so much more
time. So, if you want to power your
projects with live search data, check it
out using my link down in description
and start to get your real-time search
result data from Google, YouTube, and
even more. And thank you, SER API for
sponsoring this video. Anyways, we got a
pretty bad case of terminology soup we
are needing to solve today, especially
when the terminologies are much more
intimidating than the actual idea. So,
instead of buzzing your ears, let me
first introduce the concept to you
intuitively. What Deepsee essentially
proposes that let's throw the decay
alone standard out of the window.
Instead of using a single residual
connection, you now run multiple of them
in parallel. But first, what even is a
residual connection? So in the early
days of neural networks, researchers
noticed that when you stack more layers,
the better the model would get. This
then gave rise to the idea of a deep
neural network. But this creates a
problem later on when these networks are
used in much more complicated settings
because when your neural network is
stacked and packaged hundreds of layers
deep, information and learning signals
can start to vanish. So the earlier
layers become much harder to train
effectively. So to address this gradient
vanishing and unstable optimization
problem, a lot of more complicated
models started adding this thing called
a residual connection. And the idea is
simple. After a deep and heavy
computation, which can be a block of
attention or a block of V forward
network, the output of those block would
be combined with its input. Hence giving
residual connection an alternative name
called a skip connection as it is
essentially combining information that
has skipped a calculation. This helps
ensure the original signal can be
carried forward through an identity path
even in very deep models and preserve a
route where learning signals can flow
backwards more directly. But Deepseek
was like, hey, since one residual
connection is so good, why not have more
of them? On top of that, inserting a set
of learnable weights so that every layer
can choose whether to keep connection
streams separate, partially merge them,
or swap information between them. This
is why the name evolved from skip
connection into hyperconnection but also
not something plain like wider
connection as this is more flexible and
a trainable way of connecting and not
some simple increase in dimensions. But
technically this hyperconnection idea
was first proposed by by dense in a
paper back in September 2024 and not by
deepseek and their experiments were at a
much smaller scale compared to what
deepseek later tried to push in it. They
did a lot of hyperparameter sweeps on an
1 billion parameter model and then also
validated the results on a 7 billion
parameter model. But as promising as the
idea sounds, there was actually a major
problem to this approach. Residual
connections were originally introduced
because the skip path makes very deep
networks much easier to optimize since
signals and gradients have a direct
route to flow through. adding more
residual connections and then making the
mixing between them trainable. It is
like asking the process itself to become
incredibly unstable. And it is. In some
extreme cases, the residual stream
signal can be amplified up to 3,000
times leading to exploding gradients.
So, this direction didn't immediately
become mainstream. But there is an
upside potential. It could theoretically
provide faster training conversions and
better performance due to flexible
information routing. So Deep Seek did
not let this slide and they basically
thought if the trainable mixing is what
makes it unstable, why not just
stabilize the mixing and that's exactly
what they did in their new MHC paper.
The MHC paper combined the insights from
HC like the empirical observation of
residual connections being four is the
optimal amount along with their ablation
studies. Deepse seek has truly unleashed
the full potential of hyperconnections.
Other than stabilizing it, they made
some crazy improvements. On the training
side, MHC doesn't just avoid exploding
gradients vaguely. It specifically
mitigates the instability HC shows and
ends up with a final loss reduction of
0.021 compared to the baseline. So, it
basically gave it a better training
behavior. On the performance side, their
runs on a 27 billion parameter model
gave consistent improvements across all
the benchmarks against the model without
hyperconnection and most importantly its
scales across model sizes and the total
amount of training tokens. But before we
celebrate too early, there was still a
major roadblock. Having four parallel
residual connections pretty much sounds
like the compute of this process is
guaranteed to be increased by four times
as you need to ship these extra
residuals between the states. This was
another reason why hyperconnection
didn't get adapted initially too because
there are now four new processes that
can be calculated as straightforward as
before. So the systems overhead will
still be brutal as there are no
optimizations. So as deepseek being
deepseek they of course have an
optimized implementation ready and when
they humbly say that they are
incorporating rigorous infrastructure
optimization to ensure efficiency. Oh
yeah, you know it means some diabolical
hardware optimization is being done on
the hardware level that would make
hyperconnections look like some free
lunch that the AI research field left
dangling. This process includes writing
custom kernels which is basically a
low-level GPU program for math
calculations. Optimizing the
intermediate math layouts to make them
more efficient to process and reducing
memory stalls by scheduling compute and
data movement a lot tighter so the GPU
has less idle time. This optimization
only gave MHC a 6.7% compute overhead
reducing nearly three times the memory
traffic as the real tax for
hyperconnection is actually not the
compute but the time waiting for the
calculations to be done. So now that you
understand how it works intuitively, I
think it's time to bring out the
terminology soup. One of the biggest
problem you would encounter right away
when reading this paper is that what in
the Terrence Tiles world are all these
terms? You barely see them in any
typical AI papers, but in this paper,
they are dropped like you are a zoomer
trying to understand the Gen Z slangs.
And under the hood, they just mean some
concept that you have a simpler way to
describe it. Okay, so as we know now why
it's called hyperconnection, Deepseek's
manifold constraint basically just means
they don't let those hyperconnection
mixing weights be arbitrary. In this
case, the manifold is a very specific
set of matrices with strict roles. The
entries have to be non- negative and
each row in each column sums to one.
This type of matrix is called a doubly
stochastic matrix and the entire space
of these matrices has a name too which
is called the Burkhoff polytope.
Basically the allowed region where all
valid doubly stochastic mixing lives.
But you would have to turn your learned
mixing matrix within the four residual
connections into one of these doubly
stochastic matrices. Right? And since
the constraint is so specific, you don't
just clip values and praise. you
actually have to project your matrix
onto that set. So this is where you use
an algorithm to iteratively push your
matrix into that burkhoff polytope and
that algorithm is called synhorn knob.
It's an iterative procedure that starts
from a non-gative matrix and repeatedly
normalizes the rows to sum to one then
normalizes the columns to sum to one and
rinse and repeat for a fixed number of
times. After enough iterations, what you
get is an approximation of a doubly
stochastic matrix. meaning an
approximation of your matrix on that
constrained manifold. And when you
perform this kind of project to a
normalized matrix step, people call the
result an entropically projected matrix.
So if you ever feel like vomiting words,
you could explain MHC's key innovation
being that SORN knob takes the
hyperconnection residual mixing matrix,
does an entropic projection onto the
Burkhoff polytope and turns it into a
doubly stochastic matrix to prevent the
hyperconnection from exploding. Very
useful. But yeah, that's it for this
video. I guess every deep sea research
is just a banger. And if you like the
way I explain LM concepts intuitively, I
have actually made a brand new learning
website where I wrote an intuitive
explanation of the fundamentals of LLM
from the ground up. From how LM
tokenization works, the basics of
residual connection all the way to how
post training works. A total of 100,000
words have been written on the website.
And this is only the start. This is the
place where I'll be breaking down
advanced or even Frontier LM topics
intuitively to accompany my videos as a
lot of you guys complain about not
understanding a few parts of my video or
just the entirety. The reason why I
wrote this is because I genuinely think
anyone could understand LLM no matter
how difficult it may seem just like
today's MHC and it'll also be a great
hub to contain all the knowledge that
Frontier has into one concentrated and
searchable place. And with me now being
done with the fundamental section for
those of you guys who want to get into
LMS, this is probably the best place for
you to dive into the technical parts
without being presented and intimidated
by some crazy looking maths. And what
you can do instead is finish this then
look at the math which to be honest I
wish I had something like this during
the time when I just started learning
machine learning. And right now I am
also putting out a launch special and a
new year new me discount for 2026. So
you can use the code NYNM for 50% off a
yearly plan. And thank you guys for
watching. A big shout out to Spam Match,
Chris Ladoo, Degan, Robert Zaviasa,
Marcelo Ferraria, Proof and Enu, DX
Research Group, Alex Midwest Maker, and
many others that support me through
Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on Twitter
if you haven't and I'll see you in the
next